---
title: "Contributions to SimplyE"
subtitle: "Peer Production Experience Report"
author: "Kate Reagor"
date: "11/29/2019"
output:
  html_document: default
---
*Citations are in APA Format*

When I chose the SimplyE ebook platform as the project I wished to contribute to, I knew it was likely to be a challenge. Though SimplyE is fully open-source, it is almost exclusively maintained by employees of a handful of organizations: the New York Public Library, which founded the project, along with Lyrasis and Amigos Library Services - two non-profit organizations making a business of implementing and administering the platform for libraries. 

It also became clear that some areas of the project are more open than others. Though the codebase on GitHub is fully open to contributions, contributing to the project’s documentation requires rather more effort. Both the [Libraries Simplified website](http://www.librarysimplified.org/get-involved.html) and the [SimplyE Confluence site](https://confluence.nypl.org/display/SIM/Ways+to+Contribute) suggest documentation improvements as an area of need, and yet the instructions for doing so are remarkably vague. The Ways to Contribute page on the Confluence site says that normal Wiki users may only offer edit suggestions via the comments section. Those wishing to join the Documentation Team and contribute directly may “volunteer to help via one of the mailing lists”, but no link to these rumored lists was offered and I was unable to find them elsewhere on the page.

In hopes of gaining access another way, I reached out to Christine Peterson, the Engagement & Emerging Technologies Coordinator and SimplyE Project Manager at Amigos Library Services, with whom I have a professional acquaintance. Peterson gave me an overview of the SimplyE program’s inner workings and the different points of contribution to the program. She also cited a need within the program for documentation and promotional materials - a need so great that Amigos recently received a grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) specifically for the purpose of developing these materials (personal communication, September 30, 2019). After I expressed an interest in contributing to this area of the project, Peterson agreed to contact the New York Public Library on my behalf about obtaining login credentials for the documentation wiki.

This promising start, unfortunately, was quickly followed by a period of significant delays. My plan for contribution was in one of the most neglected areas: that of informational guides for libraries using SimplyE to distribute to their patrons. Many ebook adopters are older and not particularly tech-savvy, yet what few instructions were on offer were entirely online, assumed a fair amount of technical knowledge, and contained more than a few typos. So I began by downloading the SimplyE app, intending to document every step of the process myself. After a promising start, however, I ran into a problem: I was unable to successfully download an ebook. Upon checking the application’s reviews in the Google Play Store, I found I was not the only one encountering this problem. I discovered later that this issue was the result of a bug related to an incompatibility between Adobe ebook DRM and the Google store, and it was on track to be resolved within a few weeks (Danielle Plumer, personal communication, October 7, 2019), but for the time it meant I was unable to complete my task.

It wasn’t until November that I finally received word both on the Android app and my login credentials. Christine Peterson had contacted me two weeks prior saying that NYPL had been trying for weeks to set up a new login for the Confluence site and she didn’t know why it was taking so long. Finally on November 7th she delivered both a login and the news that the Android app was now fully functional once more. My excitement was short-lived, however, for it turned out that the credentials did not work. After a few more messages back and forth were unable to resolve this issue, Peterson eventually offered to share her login credentials with me so that I might submit my contributions through her account. With no other solution in sight, I took her up on the offer.

In the intervening time between credential communications, I had created three one-page How-To guides related to SimplyE: instructions for downloading the app and connecting to a library catalog, instructions for searching the catalog, and instructions for reserving, downloading, and managing ebooks. Once I had access to the wiki, I created a new page under the section For Librarians > Share Promotional Materials titled “Printable How-To Guides for Library Patrons”. I shared the guides both as PDFs and Word Documents, to give full flexibility for future edits by others. I considered posting the guides under other formats, but decided against it as my personal experience with librarians suggests that they are most comfortable working with Word. 

After submission, I did receive one piece of feedback. Risa Wolf from NYPL requested that I also include the image files used in the documents, and I did so. She did not offer an explanation, but I imagine it might be useful if someone wished to create similar documents or adapt the guides to other media.

The guides can be found on the Confluence site at https://confluence.nypl.org/display/SIM/Printable+How-To+Guides+for+Library+Patrons. Because I had to make my contribution under Christine Peterson’s account it is marked as being created by her, so I made a note at the bottom of the page indicating that I was the creator of this particular submission. 

Though I did expect contributing to an organization-run open source project would involve more barriers than other more distributed projects, I was surprised at how difficult it ended up being just getting access. It’s interesting to me that documentation and promotional materials were cited more than once as a particular need, and yet that seems to be the area where the most barriers to participation exist. The library field likely has many more people drawn to writing, editing, and creative projects relative to coders, and the SimplyE program could really benefit from attracting rather than blocking that sort of contribution. I do wonder if some of this stems from the program being managed by engineers rather than librarians, considering how much more open the coding side of the program is.

But while I am a little disappointed that I wasn’t able to submit the work under my own name, I’m not sorry I chose this particular project. I feel strongly that open source and vendor-neutral library platforms will play a critical role in combating the power imbalance libraries currently find themselves in relative to vendors, content providers, and publishers. Along with Georgia PINES’ Evergreen ILS, and IndexData’s FOLIO and MasterKey, there are a lot of interesting developments in the open source library field. 

I think, given time, I'd like to go back and develop more SimplyE guides - possibly for the iOS version or guides that include audiobooks for those libraries which have implemented them. But if I do, I think I’d want to be able to do it under my own name.